Add systemd-sysext docs for custom extensions (#232)
flatcar-linux/flatcar-docs: docs/provisioning/sysext/_index.md

---
title: Systemd-sysext
description: Extending the base OS with systemd-sysext images
weight: 39
---

Flatcar Container Linux bundles various software components with fixed versions together into one release.

> For users that require a particular version of a software component this means that the software needs to be supplied out of band and overwrite the inbuilt software copy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For users that require a particular version of a software component this means that the software needs to be supplied out of band and overwrite the built-in software copy.
```

In the past Torcx was introduced as a way to switch between Docker versions.
Another approach we recommended was to [store binaries in `/opt/bin`](../container-runtimes/use-a-custom-docker-or-containerd-version/) and prefer them in the `PATH`.

The systemd project announced the portable services feature to address deploying custom services.

> However, since it only covered the service itself without making the client binaries available on the user, it didn't really fit the use case fully.

Author: I think this is very useful against confusion because the sysext docs talk about this: https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd-sysext.html

> This means they are not suitable for shipping resources that are processed by subsystems running in earliest boot. Specifically, OS extension images are not suitable for shipping system services or [systemd-sysusers(8)](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd-sysusers.html#) definitions. See [Portable Services](https://systemd.io/PORTABLE_SERVICES) for a simple mechanism for shipping system services in disk images, in a similar fashion to OS extensions.

The systemd-sysext feature finally provides a way to extend the base OS with a `/usr` overlay, and thereby making custom binaries available to the user.

> While systemd-sysext images are not really meant to also include systemd units, Flatcar ships `ensure-sysext.service` as workaround to automatically load the image's services.

Author: see other comment on why this clarification is meaningful

> Systemd-sysext support is ready in Flatcar versions ≥ 3185.0.0 for basic custom sysext images.

Author: Thanks, sounds better

## Torcx deprecation

Since systemd-sysext is a more generic solution than Torcx, it will replace Torcx and Torcx is scheduled for removal from Flatcar (no date or major release version yet).

> Starting from Flatcar version 3185.0.0 you can already migrate any Torcx usage and convert your Torcx image with the helper script linked in the end of this document.

Reviewer: or to the section

> Starting from Flatcar version 3185.0.0 you can already migrate any Torcx usage and convert your Torcx image with the helper script linked in the end of this document.

Author: Ok, liked to the repo

If your binaries link against Flatcar's binaries under `/usr`, you must couple your sysext image to the Flatcar version by specyfing `VERSION=MAJOR.MINOR.PATH` to match the `/etc/os-release` version.
This means that the sysext image won't be loaded anymore after an OS update.
Therefore, it is recommended that you try to use static binaries which lifts the requirement of having to couple the versions.
In this case you can specify `SYSEXT_LEVEL=1.0` instead of `VERSION`.
The matching semantics for `SYSEXT_LEVEL` are limited at the moment and the use case for bumping the version are not there yet.
In summary, this is what you will normally write to the metadata file:

```
ID=flatcar
SYSEXT_LEVEL=1.0
```

Then place your binaries under `usr/bin/` and your systemd units under `usr/lib/systemd/system/`.
To enable systemd units you can include the symlinks it would generate when enabling the units, e.g., `sockets.target.wants/my.socket` → `../my.socket`.

## Supplying your sysext image from Ignition

The following Container Linux Config (CLC YAML) can be be transpiled to Ignition JSON and will download a custom Docker+containerd sysext image on first boot.

> It also takes care of disabling Torcx and future inbuild Docker and containerd sysext images we plan to ship in Flatcar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also takes care of disabling Torcx and future built-in Docker and containerd sysext images we plan to ship in Flatcar.
```

```yaml
storage:
  files:
    - path: /etc/extensions/mydocker.raw
      filesystem: root
      mode: 0644
      contents:
        remote:
          url: https://myserver.net/mydocker.raw
    - path: /etc/systemd/system-generators/torcx-generator
  links:
    - path: /etc/extensions/docker-flatcar.raw
      target: /dev/null
    - path: /etc/extensions/containerd-flatcar.raw
      target: /dev/null
```

After boot you can see it loaded in the output of the `systemd-sysext` command:

```
HIERARCHY EXTENSIONS SINCE
/opt      none       -
/usr      mydocker   Wed 2022-03-23 14:16:37 UTC
```

You can reload the sysext images at runtime by executing `systemctl restart systemd-sysext`.
This triggers `ensure-sysext.service` to reevaluate `multi-user.target`, `sockets.target`, and `timers.target`, making sure your enabled systemd units run.
A manual `systemd-sysext refresh` is not recommended.

## Creating custom sysext images

> The [`sysext-bakery`](https://github.com/flatcar-linux/sysext-bakery) repository under the Flatcar GitHub organization servers as central point for sysext building tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`sysext-bakery`](https://github.com/flatcar-linux/sysext-bakery) repository under the Flatcar GitHub organization serves as a central point for sysext building tools.
```
